hey this is Preston Walker reminding you
to mind your decisions in the NCAA March
Madness tournament a bracket typically
consists of 64 basketball teams playing
single elimination games until there's a
single champion the question is what are
the odds of getting all of the picks
perfectly by pure luck it's an
interesting mathematical exercise that I
want to go over so one way to approach
this problem is to first count the
number of games we can do this by
counting the number of games in each
round the first round involves 32 games
because each of the 64 teams is paired
up with another team
now each subsequent round will involve
half the number of games because half of
the teams are eliminated in each round
so this second round involves 16 teams
the third round involves 8 teams and so
on and we keep having the number of
games until we get to just one game
where we have a champion we can get the
total number of games by adding up these
numbers and we get 63 games now I want
to mention this is the long way to do
this the shortcut is you can notice that
all 64 teams lose exactly once except
the champion that's another way that you
can see there are 63 games and you can
generalize this logic that in a
tournament of two to the end teams with
no byes
there must be two to the N minus 1 games
played in total it's a nice little
combinatorial identity that we learn for
March Madness
so now let's calculate the odds
if each pick has a 50% chance or
probability of 1/2 of being correct by
pure luck
while picking one game we'll have a
chance of 1/2 so we need to pick 63
games which will be 1/2 to the power of
63 this equals 1 over about 9.2
quintillion which is an astronomically
large number because it's so hard to
pick a perfect bracket that's part of
the appeal of March Madness good luck
with your picks
thanks for watching these math videos
available for free on youtube build
confidence for students and inspire
mathematical discovery for viewers
around the world
they have over 100 million views and the
channel has over 1 million subscribers
please subscribe for free tea of the
newest videos and evil me a puzzle or
math topic pressure and mind your
decisions calm if you so choose you can
check on my merchandise on teespring you
can check my books listed in the video
description and you can support me on
patreon thanks for watching and thanks
for your support